Hi, my name is Sadeaka Watson, and so that's me.
I work as a data scientist at Eli Lilly, the pharmaceutical company.
I'm on the development team for a Shiny application that is used at Lilly.
So essentially my job is to wear this hat, the app developer hat.
This isn't just a normal Shiny app.
This is a complex production-grade app.
We get a new version of the app released every month
with new features and bug fixes.
And a lot of people in my organization
visit this app every day, so it's really important
that the app is functioning properly all the time.
So with that in mind, I'd like to begin with a story
about something that happened to me back in May 2021.
So I was in my home office working on a new feature for the app,
but of course I was multitasking because I was also keeping an eye
on the activity in our team chat window.
So one of the users was saying she was having some issues with the app.
It wasn't populating the drop-down menu with the values that she was expecting.
So the values were in the app before,
and then now all of a sudden she didn't see them anymore.
So one of the other developers identified the issue
and determined that we would have to quickly release a new version of the app
that resolves the issue with the drop-down menu.
And that's when I panicked because I realized
that meant two things were about to happen.
First, it meant that I would have to put on another hat,
my code reviewer hat.
So as a code reviewer, I'm responsible for reviewing GitHub pull requests,
have to read the code to make sure it adheres to our coding standards,
and then I have to run the app in a local environment
to make sure that all the old features work with the new features.
I have to check the radio buttons, the drop-down menus,
the contents of the tables.
I have to make sure that the database API and the model API connections
are still working as they used to as we added these new features.
And so if it passes those tests, then we deploy the app to the test server.
But then that means I have to put on yet another hat.
This time I have to put on my app tester hat.
So as a member of the app testing team,
I was one of several people that had to manually
test the deployed version of the app.
So I would have to open the app in a web browser
and then run a lot of the same tests as before,
check the radio buttons, check the drop-down menus,
check the API connections, database connections,
all those other things that I did before in the code review.
And so now the only difference is that this
is on the deployed version of the app as opposed
to the pre-deployment version.
Now, testing is very important.
It does allow us to catch bugs so that we can fix them
before the new version of the app is released to production.
However, as one of the people who was responsible for actually
running the test, I could say that this
was a really extremely tedious, painful experience for me.
It was very stressful.
I also felt undervalued because I'm thinking,
OK, I have a PhD in statistics, and yet my job now
is to click this radio button or check this drop-down menu.
So I felt like this wasn't a good use of my time.
Another issue is that I and the other app testers
had other priorities.
So we weren't full-time app testers.
We could only run the test when we
had time to squeeze testing in.
And that meant that managing all of those schedules
across the different testers meant
that it could take a long time for us
to get through those tests and actually go to the next stage
of our software release.
So that was increasing the amount of time
it took us to deploy the app.
Because it was so time-intensive,
we had to sparingly apply these tests.
So we couldn't afford to run them
as new features were coming in.
We had to use multiple scenarios.
We could only do them really once if we could do that.
And then lastly, we found that different testers were
running the tests with slightly different conditions.
So there was some subjective assessment
with whether or not the test passed or failed.
So one tester could say it passed,
and another person running the same test
would say that it failed.
So that was a problem.
So because these releases were such a heavy burden for me,
I started looking for a way to make this process more
efficient for me and for our team.
I was already familiar with Selenium.
I knew it was a great tool for automating interactions
with the web browser.
And I figured this might help automatically check
whether the UI elements were still
working on the deployed version of the app.
I was somewhat familiar with the rvest package
and that it was great for web scraping.
So I figured this might help to programmatically extract
the contents of the web page.
And I could run some sanity checks
against it to make sure everything's rendering
properly so Selenium and rvest could work together
on the deployed version of the app.
My colleague Eric Nant recommended
that I use the Shinytest package
to test the code that other developers were submitting
in their pull requests.
So he figured that that might help to automate
some of the code reviews.
And then, of course, later I found out
that there was another version of the Shinytest package
called Shinytest2 that somebody will speak about later.
And then finally, the Shinytest documentation
was recommending that we also use the test that package.
And so now I had all these tools.
There was a bit of a learning curve,
but I took about three months of my time.
And eventually, over the next three months,
I was able to use those tools to create an automated testing
pipeline.
Let's see how the software release workflow changed
after introducing these tools.
So in the code review stage in blue,
we see the manual pre-deployment testing during code reviews
was replaced with the Shinytest2 script that
automates these same tasks.
And now the code reviewer hat sits
on the head of the bot that runs the test script.
And then in orange, in the post-deployment testing stage,
I'm running the manual regression test.
I'm replacing those with a suite of Selenium test scripts.
And then I get to remove that heavy app tester hat
from my head and place it on the bot who
is happy to run those test scripts.
At least he doesn't complain about it if he does not
feel happy about it.
So those two changes had a significant impact
on our software release workflow.
Our code reviewers and app testers had less work to do.
They weren't feeling stressed out with each new release.
We didn't have to worry about testers balancing their testing
duties with other high-priority work,
so we ended up shortening our time to deployment
from five days to five hours, which was pretty
huge for our testing team.
We could apply our testing criteria as often as needed.
So no matter how many releases we had during the month
or feature pull requests that we merged during the month.
And then because the test logic was contained in the test
script, that meant we could consistently apply that test
logic from one test run to the next
so that removed that variation in test results
that we were looking for.
So I've talked about this before on the previous slides,
but here's where I get to formally introduce
the automated testing pipeline that I'm proposing.
It contains four key principles.
First, I believe you should automate the tests.
You should actually have some sort of programmatic
representation of your test logic.
And this could obviously be, we could easily
fill an hour or maybe a day talking about this,
but lots of different things like how do you
recover safely from errors?
How do you appropriately log the test results?
How do you have this repository of all your test artifacts,
maybe your screenshots or things
that were downloaded in the course of running the app?
That's what I mean by automating the test, all of that.
Next, it's important to have one or more development servers
that are completely separate from your production server.
And that allows us to see how the updated app works
without breaking the production version that end users
are interacting with.
And then the next two principles have
to do with when we would run the test.
The first is that I recommend running
some pre-deployment tests so that you can integrate
these features safely in a safe space on your development
server without crashing the version of your app
that the end users are using.
And then finally, I would recommend
running the post-deployment check also
on the development server.
And this is where we can more closely mimic
what the end users are going to experience when they log
into the app using the web browser.
So again, pre-deployment and post-deployment,
that's really important.
One question that comes up is whether automation
makes sense for a particular use case or a particular web app.
And to answer this question, I usually
follow up with a couple of follow-up questions.
The first would be, is the logic consistent?
The test logic, is it consistent from one run to the next?
So if you can say, step one, step two, step three,
if you can actually have all of that logic
and not have to worry about a change from one to the next,
that's one consideration.
And then the second question would be
whether the test logic can be completely scripted
so that you can get the result without having
to use any sort of subjective judgment
or having some sort of human involved making that decision.
There are other considerations, obviously.
So there's, do you have the infrastructure
to support these automation tools like Shiny Test 2
or Selenium?
Do you have time to do this?
There's a little bit of a learning curve
and a little bit of time investment
in terms of writing these test scripts.
But in general, I would say if you answered yes
to both of those questions, then I
would say your app is a prime candidate for automation.
So I prepared a working example that you can play around
with on your own.
It's a simple app that allows you to create an ice cream
recipe using various ingredients like peanuts and raisins
and chocolate syrup.
And for the adventurous, if you want
to add some chicken nuggets to your ice cream,
no judgment here, but we allow you to do that.
So the GitHub repo linked at the bottom
has all the code needed to run the app.
It also has the Shiny Test 2 and the Selenium code
that will allow you to just kind of play around
with this in your own environment.
So I definitely encourage you to check it out.
I created a couple of screencasts
that demonstrate how this would work.
So first, I'll show you the pre-deployment testing
with Shiny Test 2.
Now, if you're running the Shiny Test
script in the RStudio IDE, I'll pause this.
First, you'll see that there's a Run Test button visible
at the top of the script.
And if you click that, you'll see
that there's some activity happening over here
in the Build tab that shows the progress of the test run.
This test script automatically opens up
this local version of the app in a web browser window.
So I didn't do that.
It did it on its own in Google Chrome.
And then you'll notice that it's selecting various checkboxes
and entering text in the text field
and doing all kinds of things and showing
how the app is changing.
So all of those things happened automatically.
And so when I go back to the RStudio IDE,
I see that the test result folder now
contains a few files that were saved in the test run.
And if I click on one of those, I've
got some screenshots that show what the app looked
like at various points in the app.
There's also this JSON file that shows
the values of various elements in the UI
as they were at the time that the snapshot was created.
If you stick around for the next talk in this session,
you'll actually get a chance to see
the package author of the ShinyTest2 developer
give a presentation about ShinyTest2.
So I didn't spend a whole lot of time
thinking about that for this presentation.
But I highly recommend that you check that out.
And finally, I'll show you what the post-deployment version
of the testing looked like with Selenium.
So as before, we click the Run Test button at the top.
We will also see the test run progress in the Build tab
in the upper right corner.
Now, before, we would actually open up automatically
this web browser in Google Chrome.
But this is a headless browser, so we don't actually
have access to that browser.
Instead, it's just going to do it under the hood
and silently execute those test instructions that I provided.
And so we'll just see the mouse that I can't see anymore
for some reason.
Where are you, mouse?
I see it on your side, but not my side for some reason.
Give me mouse.
OK, there we go.
I'll pause that here.
So what you saw, and unfortunately, I
wasn't able to narrate that while it was going,
while I was looking for my mouse,
was that it was showing you how it was actually programmatically
running the script.
And then it captured some screenshots along the way
as it progressed through the various test scripts.
And it also, in the log area, it let
you know what was going on in the app.
So at this point, it was selecting the flavor.
And another point, it was selecting the recipe name
and so on.
So this was all very easy and straightforward
thanks to the tools that some of the other developers
have created.
So I thank them for that.
So in closing, I'd like to re-emphasize
that these tools really make automated testing more
accessible to the general population of data scientists,
especially people like me who don't have any formal training
in software engineering or software testing.
We're kind of expected to know a lot
and do a lot about a lot of different areas.
But this makes that a lot easier for us to do.
And then another thing that is out of scope for this talk,
but I get asked this all the time
when I give a presentation about automated testing,
how does this fit into the CI-CD pipeline?
It definitely does.
And there's lots of tools that you can use to do that.
In particular, for example, if you had GitHub Actions,
you could programmatically run.
So as a person submits their pull request,
you could programmatically run your tests
on the pre-deployment version of the app,
merge the pull requests, deploy to the next test server,
and then actually programmatically run
that next set of scripts.
So you can do a lot of these things very, very easy.
So I'd like to thank my colleagues at Eli Lilly
and the Design Hub Data Insights, Information
and Digital Solutions, and the Statistical Innovation Center
teams for their help.
And I'd also like to thank Wardell Piquette
at Piquette Studios for his help with the graphic design
in my presentation.
And here's my contact information.
Feel free to reach out if you'd like to discuss anything.
And I thank you for your time.
Thank you.